## Stop and Frisk Policy: Concerning Disparities Centered Around Racial and Age Groups

### Research Objective

Given the policy's controversy, it is crucial to analyze the disparities the policy causes across racial lines. Moreover, the analysis aims to investigate any possible differences between the number of arrests of one age group to another across racial lines. 

### Introduction

The “Stop and Frisk” policing policy aims to lower the number of drugs, weapons, and contraband available. Proponents of the approach argue that it is effective, sustained by the decrease in crime during the early 1990s. Nevertheless, the policy remains controversial as critics say it violates constitutional rights. Firstly, a legal basis is not needed to stop individuals under this policy, allowing police officers to stop individuals at their discretion. Secondly, critics argue that this policy is disproportionately applied to individuals of different races, as Blacks and Hispanics make up 80% of those stopped(citation); for most stops, the justification centers around suspicion of a person carrying a firearm. 

Due to the topic's controversial nature, I am interested in exploring the data from the NYPD. I am curious to see if there is a disparity between a person's race and the physical force used in the stop.  I want to know how the interactions between the police officers and the person are, depending on the individual's race. Often in the media, there are countless reports in which police questioning escalates into violence, particularly when it concerns minorities. Due to the external circumstances, I am curious to see if we see a similar pattern in these stops that will hopefully tell us more about the behavior of the police. 

The importance of the research question relates to the ethical concerns surrounding the policy. Even if the procedure proves to be effective, it should not justify police action that undermines the constitutional rights of the citizens. It is vital to ensure that every citizen is treated fairly in the eyes of the law, no matter what the judicial goal is. Analyzing the relationship between the race of those stopped and how they are treated can tell us more if the policy is enforced correctly across all ethnicities. Moreover, the possible disparities in behavior can tell us more about the trust we have in our police officers. If the findings give rise to concern, then it’s further evidence that we can do better to improve the relationship between citizens and police. If anything, the results might support the argument for eliminating or amending the “Stop and Frisk” policy.

An important thing to note about this dataset comes from observations. Specifically, the observations in the data come from police reports that police filled out following an interaction. In other words, the data does not come from a random experiment, even though the observations are independent. Nevertheless, there is data that we can analyze, such as the various response variables. For instance, we can analyze the purpose for the stop, the duration of the encounter, and the identification of both officer and “potential suspect.” However, we should be careful to assume an explanatory variable, as there is no control or organization to this data since it is not an experiment. Regardless, there are some possible confounding variables to consider when observing the stops occurring in several locations. Some stops might occur more frequently and for a longer duration, especially if a site poses a security concern for NYPD, regardless of whether or not someone acts suspiciously. Therefore, it might be the case that part of this data might have such stops that fit the criteria. Another confounding variable might be that the stops occur if the NYPD is dealing with an emergency call and are in search of a person of interest, in which case, stops may occur that are outside of the “Stop and Frisk'' policy, and this may be recorded in the dataset we are analyzing. Overall, one should note a context not captured in the dataset, as we are only given the essential details.

With that in mind, one caution to remember is that this data comes from incident reports written by police officers; therefore, there is a possibility for bias to be present in these reports, more so since this is not a randomized study. As mentioned above, some details or context can help explain why a particular person was stopped or why the stop may have escalated to violence. 

### Methods of Analysis
The dataset at the center of my analysis is the “Stop, Question and Frisk” data provided by the New York Police Department. I accessed the dataset via Courseworks, which the professor provided. The data that I will analyze has information from 2018, qualifying as recent data worthy of being explored. The dataset has variables of interest that provide quick information about “Stop and Frisks” carried out by police officers, such as race, duration time of the stop and frisk, boroughs, etc. 

As mentioned above, the dataset consists of both categorical and quantitative variables; however, most of the variables of interest are categorical. However, it is essential to establish that this analysis assumes that the data collected is independent of each other - such belief gives validity to the hypothesis testing analysis. Before proceeding with data analysis, it was essential to remove data that were incredible outliers or had blank values in the fields of interest.
